# Collab Details

It is much easier to verify skills and abilities of an individual but very difficult to understand their character. Can you collaborate with those whom you cannot trust? You can now, **Collab** aims to foster trustless collaborations amongst strangers by making earning distribution trustless using Smart Contracts on Cardano. You just need to ~~trust~~ verify the contract logic (which is difficult but still easier than understanding humans) and you can collaborate with any person or group that fits the project's needs.

How does it work?

Once you find a capable group of people to deliver a client project you go ahead and create a "Collab". It is a smart contract whose address is going to be the address that client pays to. Yeah you read that right, not to any individual of a group but to a Smart Contract.

While creating a "Collab" you enter the details of the group members (Name, VerificationKeyHash and Project Allocation). A unique (using a UTxO Outref from collab creator's wallet i.e. unique payment address) Multi-Validator (aka Smart Contract - One Shot Minting Policy + Spending Validator) is created which locks a new UTxO with a Collab NFT and datum. This datum specifies all the collaborators, their credentials and project allocations. Anyone could be a collab creator, the collaborators verify that the details are accurate and as discussed. The collaborators need to come to a consensus on their allocations.

Given everything goes smoothly the group builds and delivers the project to client. The client is provided the Collab NFT ID (Cardano Policy ID + Asset Name) and the address where the NFT is present becomes the payment address to which the client pays. So now all the collaborators can take their initial share and be happy? Not quite, as things rarely go so smoothly in the real world. Initial allocations are estimations at best, hence the exact quantum of contribution by every collaborator becomes evident only in the end. Collab contracts take care of this by allowing withdrawal only after allocation finalization happens. Wherein all collaborators need to come to a consensus of what their actual contributions were and update allocations based on them. As we know, coming to a consensus is difficult and more so with larger number of participants. However, the inability to withdraw their earnings would be a good incentive for everyone to prioritize coming to a consensus. Every collaborator must provide their authorization (by signing the allocation finalization transaction) for withdrawals to be accessible to all. Its either all or none. Post finalization, any collaborator can claim his earning while also having to send respective earnings to all other collaborators in a single transaction.